---
layout: post
title: "Newton Fractals"
date: 2016-12-19
---
<script src="../../../../js/libraries/p5.js" type="text/javascript"></script>
<script src="../../../../js/libraries/p5.dom.js" type="text/javascript"></script>
<script src="../../../../js/newton_fractal.js"></script>
<!-- <script src="/js/newton_fractal_obf.js"></script> -->
<!-- <script src="/js/newton1d.js"></script> -->
<div id="equation">$$z_{n+1} = z_{n} - \frac{p(z_n)}{p'(z_n)}$$</div>
<div>$$p(z)=z^4 - 3z^2+2$$</div>
<!-- <div>$$p'(z)=4z^3 - 6z$$</div> -->
<br>
<div id="newton-fractal" style="display: flex;justify-content: center;"></div>
<br>
<button class="accordion">What's this?</button>
<div class="panel">
<p>
<!-- <div id="newton" style="display: flex;justify-content: center;"></div> -->
Given a function \(f(x)\), what number \(x\) can I plug in so that \(f(x)=0\)? Are there any values for \(x\) which will work?
<br><br>
This is a surprisingly important question in math, and Newton came up with a way to approximate solutions (if there are any) for differentiable functions. That is Newton came up with a way to find values of \(x\) so that \(f(x)\approx 0\). The very first formula at the top describes how to construct a sequence which will get closer and closer to a solution. We first make a random guess, call it \(z_0\). Then we construct the next term in the sequence using the formula up top. In other words \(z_1 = z_0 - \frac{p(z_0)}{p'(z_0)}\), \(z_2 = z_1 - \frac{p(z_1)}{p'(z_1)}\), and so on. For most choices of \(z_0\), this will converge to a solution quite rapidly. But for others it make take longer, or not at all. But how do we know there are any solutions at all?
<br><br>
The Fundamental Theorem of Algebra(FTA) tells us that a particular type of functions called polynomials (like the function \(p(z)\) above) will <em>always</em> have solutions. You can see how this works with a simple function here. The image above, however, is the same technique applied to a complex function. That's right, a function with real and imaginary numbers like \(i=\sqrt{-1}\) (or as Gauss called them "lateral" numbers).
<br><br>
It turns out that what the FTA really says there are always solutions to our problem <em>as long as you include imaginary numbers</em>. It actually can tell us exactly how many solutions there are too. For example, \(3x+2=0\) has one solution \(\{-\frac{2}{3}\}\), \(3x^2+2=0\) has two solutions \(\{i\sqrt{\frac{2}{3}}, -i\sqrt{\frac{2}{3}}\}\) (notice that without imaginary numbers we would have no solutions), \(3x^3+2\) has three solutions ... it gets a bit messy but you get the point. (Can you guess how many solutions \(p(z)\) from the top of the page has?)
<br><br>
The image above was generated using Newton's method. What you are seeing is a small portion of the complex plane. First, we take each point and apply Newton's method. If Newton's method works, once a point gets pretty close to a solution, it stays near the solution. So the points are colored by how many times we needed to apply Newton's in order to get that point "pretty close". So the brighter the pixel, the longer it took for that number to get close to a solution. In some cases they never get close to any solution, as it seems to be the case for the purely imaginary numbers (the vertical line in the middle). Surprisingly, doing this with any differentiable function seems to produce a fractal since the terms in the sequence generated by Newton's method exhibit chaotic behavior. You can read more about Newton's method on the <a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Newton's_method">wikipedia page</a>, and about <a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Newton_fractal">Newton fractals</a>.
</p>
</div>
