---
layout: post
title: "Langston's Ant"
date: 2017-10-14
---
<script src="../../../../js/libraries/p5.js" type="text/javascript"></script>
<script src="../../../../js/libraries/p5.dom.js" type="text/javascript"></script>
<script src="../../../../js/d3.v4.min.js"></script>
<script src="../../../../js/colorbrewer.min.js"></script>
<script src="../../../../js/langston.js"></script>

<div id="langston" style="display: flex;justify-content: center;"></div>
<div id="display-rule" style="display: flex;justify-content: center;margin-top: 10px"></div>
<div id="choose-rule" style="display: flex;justify-content: center;margin-top: 10px"></div>
<div id="enter-rule-wrapper" style="display: flex;justify-content: center;margin-top: 10px">
	<input type="text" id="enter-rule" placeholder="LRLLRL"/>
	<button id="enter-rule-submit">Add New Rule</button>
</div>

<button class="accordion">What's this?</button>
<div class="panel">
<p>
Langston's ant is a famous cellular automata which displays very unpredictable behaviour.<br/>

The ant lives on an infinite grid and decides whether to turn left or right by looking at the color of the cell it is currently on. Originally, the cells were either black or white, and if the ant was on a white cell, it turned the cell black, and turned right. If it lands on a black cell, turn it white and turn left. So this rule is called RL.<br/><br/>

As with all interesting cellular automata, the fascinating part of this is that the behavior of the ant is fully deterministic, and yet still seems random and unpredictable. For example, the ant produces a sort of symmetric, but generally unpredictable behaviour for roughly 10,000 steps. And then suddenly produces a perfectly regular pattern forever.<br/><br/>

But this lends itseld to a nice generalization. Suppose we have three colors. If it lands on color one it changes it to color two, and turns left. If it lands on color two, it changes it to color three, and turns right. Then if it lands on color three, it changes it to color one, and turns left. So we could call this rule LRL. Many of these produce similarly unpredictable behavior. Some, like LLL will simply cycle forever.<br/><br/>

Initially we just say the whole grid is color one, but we could make this a bit more complicated by allowing the board to be filled with various colors.<br/><br/>

Some smart people who went on to create <a href="http://tempusdictum.com/misc/swarmcorp-www/">the most 1995 company website ever</a> wrote a <a href="https://arxiv.org/pdf/math/9501233.pdf">paper</a> about these generalized Langston's ants. It turns out that if we have a rule like RRLL or RLLRRLLR, what they called the "even run-length property", we get interesting symmetry. Specifically, if we interpret L as 1 and R as 0, the rules which product interesting bilateral symmetry are the rules which are divisible by 3!<br/><br/>

Unfortunately I made my ant live on a torus, so their results don't quite apply... Oh well, it looks pretty!